.\" Copyright © 2005-2013  Roger Leigh <rleigh@debian.org>
.\"
.\" schroot is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify it
.\" under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" schroot is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
.\" WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
.\" General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program.  If not, see
.\" <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.so config.man
.TH SCHROOT.CONF 5 "\*[RELEASE_DATE]" "Version \*[VERSION]" "Debian sbuild"
.SH NAME
schroot.conf \- chroot definition file for schroot
.SH DESCRIPTION
\f[BI]schroot.conf\fP is a plain UTF-8 text file, describing the chroots
available for use with schroot.
.PP
Comments are introduced following a \[oq]\f[CR]\[sh]\fP\[cq] (\[lq]hash\[rq])
character at the beginning of a line, or following any other text.  All text
right of the \[oq]\f[CR]\[sh]\fP\[cq] is treated as a comment.
.PP
The configuration format is an INI-style format, split into groups of key-value
pairs separated by section names in square brackets.
.SS General options
A chroot is defined as a group of key-value pairs, which is started by a name
in square brackets on a line by itself.  The file may contain multiple groups
which therefore define multiple chroots.
.PP
A chroot definition is started by the name of the chroot in square brackets.
For example,
.IP
\f[CR]\[lB]sid\[rB]
.PP
The name is subject to certain naming restrictions.  For further details, see
the section \[lq]\fIChroot Names\fP\[rq] below.
.PP
This is then followed by several key-value pairs, one per line:
.TP
\f[CBI]type=\fP\f[CI]type\fP
The type of the chroot.  Valid types are \[oq]plain\[cq], \[oq]directory\[cq],
\[oq]file\[cq], \[oq]loopback\[cq], \[oq]block\-device\[cq],
\[oq]btrfs\-snapshot\[cq] and \[oq]lvm\-snapshot\[cq].  If empty or omitted,
the default type is \[oq]plain\[cq].  Note that \[oq]plain\[cq] chroots do not
run setup scripts and mount filesystems; \[oq]directory\[cq] is recommended for
normal use (see \[lq]\fIPlain and directory chroots\fP\[rq], below).
.TP
\f[CBI]description=\fP\f[CI]description\fP
A short description of the chroot.  This may be localised for different
languages; see the section \[lq]\fILocalisation\fP\[rq] below.
.TP
\f[CBI]priority=\fP\f[CI]number\fP
Set the priority of a chroot.  \f[CI]number\fP is a positive integer indicating
whether a distribution is older than another.  For example, \[lq]oldstable\[rq]
and \[lq]oldstable-security\[rq] might be \[oq]0\[cq], while \[lq]stable\[rq]
and \[lq]stable-security\[rq] are \[oq]1\[cq], \[lq]testing\[rq] is \[oq]2\[cq]
and \[lq]unstable\[rq] is \[oq]3\[cq].  The values are not important, but the
difference between them is.  This option is deprecated and no longer used by
schroot, but is still permitted to be used; it will be obsoleted and removed in
a future release.
.TP
\f[CBI]message-verbosity=\fP\f[CI]verbosity\fP
Set the verbosity of messages printed by schroot when setting up, running
commands and cleaning up the chroot.  Valid settings are \[oq]quiet\[cq]
(suppress most messages), \[oq]normal\[cq] (the default) and \[oq]verbose\[cq]
(show all messages).  This setting is overridden by the options \fI\-\-quiet\fP
and \fI\-\-verbose\fP.
.TP
\f[CBI]users=\fP\f[CI]user1,user2,...\fP
A comma-separated list of users which are allowed access to the chroot.  If
empty or omitted, no users will be allowed access (unless a group they belong
to is also specified in \f[CI]groups\fP).
.TP
\f[CBI]groups=\fP\f[CI]group1,group2,...\fP
A comma-separated list of groups which are allowed access to the chroot.  If
empty or omitted, no groups of users will be allowed access.
.TP
\f[CBI]root\-users=\fP\f[CI]user1,user2,...\fP
A comma-separated list of users which are allowed \fBpassword-less\fP root
access to the chroot.  If empty or omitted, no users will be allowed root
access without a password (but if a user or a group they belong to is in
\f[CI]users\fP or \f[CI]groups\fP, respectively, they may gain access with a
password).  See the section \[lq]\fISecurity\fP\[rq] below.
.TP
\f[CBI]root\-groups=\fP\f[CI]group1,group2,...\fP
A comma-separated list of groups which are allowed \fBpassword-less\fP root
access to the chroot.  If empty or omitted, no users will be allowed root
access without a password (but if a user or a group they belong to is in
\f[CI]users\fP or \f[CI]groups\fP, respectively, they may gain access with a
password).  See the section \[lq]\fISecurity\fP\[rq] below.
.TP
\f[CBI]aliases=\fP\f[CI]alias1,alias2,...\fP
A comma-separated list of aliases (alternate names) for this chroot.  For
example, a chroot named \[lq]sid\[rq] might have an \[oq]unstable\[cq] alias
for convenience.  Aliases are subject to the same naming restrictions as the
chroot name itself.
.TP
\f[CBI]profile=\fP\f[CI]directory\fP
.TP
\f[CBI]script\-config=\fP\f[CI]filename\fP
The behaviour of the chroot setup scripts may be customised on a per-chroot
basis by setting a specific configuration profile.  The directory is relative
to \fI\*[SCHROOT_SYSCONF_DIR]\fP.  The default is \[oq]default\[cq].  The files
in this directory are sourced by the setup scripts, and so their behaviour may
be customised by selecting the appropriate profile.  Alternatives are
\[oq]minimal\[cq] (minimal configuration), \[oq]desktop\[cq] (for running
desktop applications in the chroot, making more functionality from the host
system available in the chroot) and \[oq]sbuild\[cq] (for using the chroot for
Debian package building).  Other packages may provide additional profiles.  The
default values of the keys \f[CI]setup.config\fP, \f[CI]setup.copyfiles\fP,
\f[CI]setup.fstab\fP and \f[CI]setup.nssdatabases\fP are set based upon the
\f[CI]profile\fP setting.
.IP
Note that the \f[CI]profile\fP key replaces the older \f[CI]script\-config\fP
key.  The \f[CI]script\-config\fP key is exactly the same as \f[CI]profile\fP,
but has \[lq]\fI/config\fP\[rq] appended to it.  The default filename is
\[oq]default/config\[cq].  Either of these keys may be used.  If both are
present, then \f[CI]script\-config\fP will take precedence (\f[CI]profile\fP
will be unset).  \f[CI]script\-config\fP is deprecated and will be removed in a
future release.  Note that \f[CI]profile\fP is equivalent to
\f[CI]script\-config\fP if the file sourced by \f[CI]script\-config\fP only
contains the standard variables provided by schroot; if any additional
variables or shell script fragments have been added, please also set
\f[CI]setup.config\fP, which will continue to allow this file to be sourced.
It is recommended to replace the use of the sourced file with additional keys
in schroot.conf where possible, but it will continue to be possible to source
an additional configuration file using \f[CI]setup.config\fP.
.IP
Desktop users should note that the fstab file \fIdesktop/fstab\fP will need
editing if you use gdm3; please see the comments in this file for further
instructions.  The \f[CI]preserve\-environment\fP key should also be set to
\[oq]true\[cq] so that the environment is preserved inside the chroot.
.IP
If none of the configuration profiles provided above meet your needs, then they
may be edited to further customise them, and/or copied and used as a template
for entirely new profiles.
.IP
Note that the different profiles have different security implications; see the
section \[lq]\fISecurity\fP\[rq] below for further details.
.TP
\f[CBI]setup.config=\fP\f[CI]filename\fP
This key specifies a file which the setup scripts will source when they are
run.  This defaults to the same value as set by \f[CI]script\-config\fP.  The
file is a Bourne shell script, and in consequence may contain any valid shell
code, in addition to simple variable assignments.  This will, for example,
allow behaviour to be customised according to the specific chroot type or name.
Note that the script will be sourced once for each and every script invocation,
and must be idempotent.
.IP
All the default settings in this file are now settable using configuration keys
in \fIschroot.conf\fP, as detailed below.  Existing configuration should be
modified to use these keys in place of this file.  See
.BR schroot-script-config (5)
for further details.  This type of setup script configuration file is no longer
provided as part of the standard profiles, but will continue to be sourced if
present and this key is set.
.TP
\f[CBI]setup.copyfiles=\fP\f[CI]filename\fP
A file containing a list of files to copy into the chroot (one file per line).
The file will have the same absolute location inside the chroot.
.TP
\f[CBI]setup.fstab=\fP\f[CI]filename\fP
The filesystem table file to be used to mount filesystems within the chroot.
The format of this file is the same as for \fI/etc/fstab\fP, documented in
.BR fstab (5).
The only difference is that the mountpoint path \fIfs_dir\fP is relative to the
chroot, rather than the root.  Also note that mountpoints are canonicalised on
the host, which will ensure that absolute symlinks point inside the chroot, but
complex paths containing multiple symlinks may be resolved incorrectly; it is
inadvisable to use nested symlinks as mountpoints.
.TP
\f[CBI]setup.nssdatabases=\fP\f[CI]filename\fP
A file listing the system databases to copy into the chroot.  The default
databases are \[oq]passwd\[cq], \[oq]shadow\[cq], \[oq]group\[cq] and
\[oq]gshadow\[cq].  Other potential databases which could be added include
\[oq]services\[cq], \[oq]protocols\[cq], \[oq]networks\[cq], and
\[oq]hosts\[cq].  The databases are copied using
.BR getent (1)
so all database sources listed in \fI/etc/nsswitch.conf\fP will be used for
each database.
.TP
\f[CBI]setup.services=\fP\f[CI]service1,service2,...\fP
A comma-separated list of services to run in the chroot.  These will be started
when the session is started, and stopped when the session is ended.
.TP
\f[CBI]command\-prefix=\fP\f[CI]command,option1,option2,...\fP
A comma-separated list of a command and the options for the command.  This
command and its options will be prefixed to all commands run inside the chroot.
This is useful for adding commands such as nice, ionice or eatmydata for all
commands run inside the chroot.  nice and ionice will affect CPU and I/O
scheduling.  eatmydata ingores filesystem fsync operations, and is useful for
throwaway snapshot chroots where you don't care about dataloss, but do care
about high speed.
.TP
\f[CBI]personality=\fP\f[CI]persona\fP
Set the personality (process execution domain) to use.  This option is useful
when using a 32-bit chroot on 64-bit system, for example.  Valid options on
Linux are \[oq]bsd\[cq], \[oq]hpux\[cq], \[oq]irix32\[cq], \[oq]irix64\[cq],
\[oq]irixn32\[cq], \[oq]iscr4\[cq], \[oq]linux\[cq], \[oq]linux32\[cq],
\[oq]linux_32bit\[cq], \[oq]osf4\[cq], \[oq]osr5\[cq], \[oq]riscos\[cq],
\[oq]scorvr3\[cq], \[oq]solaris\[cq], \[oq]sunos\[cq], \[oq]svr4\[cq],
\[oq]uw7\[cq], \[oq]wysev386\[cq], and \[oq]xenix\[cq].  The default value is
\[oq]linux\[cq].  There is also the special option \[oq]undefined\[cq]
(personality not set).  For a 32-bit chroot on a 64-bit system,
\[oq]linux32\[cq] is the option required.  The only valid option for non-Linux
systems is \[oq]undefined\[cq].  The default value for non-Linux systems is
\[oq]undefined\[cq].
.TP
\f[CBI]preserve\-environment=\fP\f[CI]true\fP|\f[CI]false\fP
By default, the environment will not be preserved inside the chroot, instead a
minimal environment will be used.  Set to \f[CI]true\fP to always preserve the
environment.  This is useful for example when running X applications inside the
chroot, which need the environment to function correctly.  The environment may
also be preserved using the \fI\-\-preserve\-environment\fP option.
.TP
\f[CBI]shell=\fP\f[CI]shell\fP
When running a login shell a number of potential shells will be considered, in
this order: the command in the SHELL environment variable (if
\fI\-\-preserve\-environment\fP is used, or \f[CI]preserve\-environment\fP is
enabled), the user's shell in the \[oq]passwd\[cq] database, \fI/bin/bash\fP
and finally \fI/bin/sh\fP.  This setting overrides this list, and will use the
shell specified.  It may be overridden using the \fI\-\-shell\fP option.
.TP
\f[CBI]environment\-filter=\fP\f[CI]regex\fP
The environment to be set in the chroot will be filtered in order to remove
environment variables which may pose a security risk.  Any environment variable
matching the specified POSIX extended regular expression will be removed prior
to executing any command in the chroot.
.IP
Potentially dangerous environment variables are removed for safety by default
using the following regular expression:
.na
\[lq]\f[CR]^(BASH_ENV\:|CDPATH\:|ENV\:|HOSTALIASES\:|IFS\:|KRB5_CONFIG\:|KRBCONFDIR\:|KRBTKFILE\:|KRB_CONF\:|LD_.*\:|LOCALDOMAIN\:|NLSPATH\:|PATH_LOCALE\:|RES_OPTIONS\:|TERMINFO\:|TERMINFO_DIRS\:|TERMPATH)$\fP\[rq].
.ad
.SS Plain and directory chroots
Chroots of type \[oq]plain\[cq] or \[oq]directory\[cq] are directories
accessible in the filesystem.  The two types are equivalent except for the fact
that directory chroots run setup scripts, whereas plain chroots do not.  In
consequence, filesystems such as \fI/proc\fP are not mounted in plain chroots;
it is the responsibility of the system administrator to configure such chroots
by hand, whereas directory chroots are automatically configured.  Additionally,
directory chroots implement the \fBfilesystem union chroot\fP options (see
\[lq]\fIFilesystem Union chroot options\fP\[rq], below).
.PP
These chroot types have an additional (mandatory) configuration option:
.TP
\f[CBI]directory=\fP\f[CI]directory\fP
The directory containing the chroot environment.  This is where the root will
be changed to when executing a login shell or a command.  The directory must
exist and have read and execute permissions to allow users access to it.  Note
that on Linux systems it will be bind-mounted elsewhere for use as a chroot;
the directory for \[oq]plain\[cq] chroots is mounted with the \fI\-\-rbind\fP
option to
.BR mount (8),
while for \[oq]directory\[cq] chroots \fI\-\-bind\fP is used instead so that
sub-mounts are not preserved (they should be set in the \fIfstab\fP file just
like in \fI/etc/fstab\fP on the host).
.SS File chroots
Chroots of type \[oq]file\[cq] are files on the current filesystem containing
an archive of the chroot files.  They implement the \fBsource chroot\fP options
(see \[lq]\fISource chroot options\fP\[rq], below).  Note that a corresponding
source chroot (of type \[oq]file\[cq]) will be created for each chroot of this
type; this is for convenient access to the source archive, e.g. for the purpose
of updating. These additional options are also implemented:
.TP
\f[CBI]file=\fP\f[CI]filename\fP
The file containing the archived chroot environment (mandatory).  This must be
a tar (tape archive), optionally compressed with gzip or bzip2.  The file
extensions used to determine the type are are \fI.tar\fP, \fI.tar.gz\fP,
\fI.tar.bz2\fP, \fI.tgz\fP, and \fI.tbz\fP.  This file must be owned by the
root user, and not be writable by other.  Note that zip archives are no longer
supported; zip was not able to archive named pipes and device nodes, so was not
suitable for archiving chroots.
.TP
\f[CBI]location=\fP\f[CI]path\fP
This is the path to the chroot \fIinside\fP the archive.  For example, if the
archive contains a chroot in \fI/squeeze\fP, you would specify
\[lq]/squeeze\[rq] here.  If the chroot is the only thing in the archive,
i.e. \fI/\fP is the root filesystem for the chroot, this option should be left
blank, or omitted entirely.
.SS Loopback chroots
Chroots of type \[oq]loopback\[cq] are a filesystem available as a file on
disk, accessed via a loopback mount.  The file will be loopback mounted and
unmounted on demand.  Loopback chroots implement the \fBmountable chroot\fP and
\fBfilesystem union chroot\fP options (see \[lq]\fIMountable chroot
options\fP\[rq] and \[lq]\fIFilesystem Union chroot options\fP\[rq], below),
plus an additional option:
.TP
\f[CBI]file=\fP\f[CI]filename\fP
This is the filename of the file containing the filesystem, including the
absolute path.  For example \[lq]/srv/chroot/sid\[rq].
.SS Block device chroots
Chroots of type \[oq]block\-device\[cq] are a filesystem available on an
unmounted block device.  The device will be mounted and unmounted on demand.
Block device chroots implement the \fBmountable chroot\fP and \fBfilesystem
union chroot\fP options (see \[lq]\fIMountable chroot options\fP\[rq] and
\[lq]\fIFilesystem Union chroot options\fP\[rq], below), plus an additional
option:
.TP
\f[CBI]device=\fP\f[CI]device\fP
This is the device name of the block device, including the absolute path.  For
example, \[lq]/dev/sda5\[rq].
.SS Btrfs snapshot chroots
Chroots of type \[oq]btrfs\-snapshot\[cq] are a Btrfs snapshot created from an
existing Btrfs subvolume on a mounted Btrfs filesystem.  A snapshot will be
created from this source subvolume on demand at the start of a session, and
then the snapshot will be mounted.  At the end of the session, the snapshot
will be unmounted and deleted.  This chroot type implements the \fBsource
chroot\fP options (see \[lq]\fISource chroot options\fP\[rq], below).  Note
that a corresponding source chroot (of type \[oq]directory\[cq]) will be
created for each chroot of this type; this is for convenient access to the
source volume. These additional options are also implemented:
.TP
\f[CBI]btrfs\-source\-subvolume=\fP\f[CI]directory\fP
The directory containing the source subvolume.
.TP
\f[CBI]btrfs\-snapshot\-directory=\fP\f[CI]directory\fP
The directory in which to store the snapshots of the above source subvolume.
.SS LVM snapshot chroots
Chroots of type \[oq]lvm\-snapshot\[cq] are a filesystem available on an LVM
logical volume (LV).  A snapshot LV will be created from this LV on demand, and
then the snapshot will be mounted.  At the end of the session, the snapshot LV
will be unmounted and removed.
.PP
LVM snapshot chroots implement the \fBsource chroot\fP options (see
\[lq]\fISource chroot options\fP\[rq], below), and all the options for
\[oq]block\-device\[cq].  Note that a corresponding source chroot (of type
\[oq]block-device\[cq]) will be created for each chroot of this type; this is
for convenient access to the source device. This additional option is also
implemented:
.TP
\f[CBI]lvm-snapshot-options=\fP\f[CI]snapshot_options\fP
Snapshot options.  These are additional options to pass to lvcreate(8).  For
example, \[lq]\-L 2g\[rq] to create a snapshot 2 GiB in size.
.B Note:
the LV name (\fI\-n\fP), the snapshot option (\fI\-s\fP) and the original LV
path may not be specfied here; they are set automatically by schroot.
.SS Custom chroots
Chroots of type \[oq]custom\[cq] are a special type of chroot, used for
implementing new types of chroot not supported by any of the above chroot
types.  This may be useful for implementing and testing a new chroot type
without needing to write any C++ code.  However, you will need to write your
own setup script to do the setup work, since by itself this chroot type does
very little.  You will also need to add custom keys to your chroot definition
for use in the setup script; unlike the configuration for the above chroot
types, no validation of the options will take place unless you do it yourself
in your custom setup script.  These additional options are also implemented:
.TP
\f[CBI]custom-session-cloneable=\fP\f[CI]true\fP|\f[CI]false\fP
Set whether or not sessions may be cloned using this chroot (enabled by
default).
.TP
\f[CBI]custom-session-purgeable=\fP\f[CI]true\fP|\f[CI]false\fP
Set whether or not sessions may be cloned using this chroot (disabled by
default).
.TP
\f[CBI]custom-source-cloneable=\fP\f[CI]true\fP|\f[CI]false\fP
Set whether or not source chroots may be cloned using this chroot (disabled by
default).
.SS Source chroot options
The \[oq]btrfs\-snapshot\[cq], \[oq]file\[cq] and \[oq]lvm-snapshot\[cq] chroot
types implement source chroots.  Additionally, chroot types with union support
enabled implement source chroots (see \[lq]\fIFilesystem Union chroot
options\fP\[rq], below).  These are chroots which automatically create a copy
of themselves before use, and are usually session managed.  These chroots
additionally provide an extra chroot in the \fIsource:\fP namespace, to allow
convenient access to the original (non-snapshotted) data, and to aid in chroot
maintenance.  I.e. for a chroot named \fIwheezy\fP (\fIchroot:wheezy\fP), a
corresponding \fIsource:wheezy\fP chroot will be created.  For compatibility
with older versions of schroot which did not support namespaces, a chroot with
a \fI\-source\fP suffix appended to the chroot name will be created in addition
(i.e. \fIwheezy\-source\fP using the above example).  Note that these
compatibility names will be removed in schroot 1.5.0, so the use of the
\fIsource:\fP namespace is preferred over the use of the \fI-source\fP suffix
form.  See
.BR schroot (1)
for further details.
.PP
These chroots provide the following additional options:
.TP
\f[CBI]source\-clone=\fP\f[CI]true\fP|\f[CI]false\fP
Set whether the source chroot should be automatically cloned (created) for this
chroot.  The default is \f[CI]true\fP to automatically clone, but if desired
may be disabled by setting to \f[CI]false\fP.  If disabled, the source chroot
will be inaccessible.
.TP
\f[CBI]source\-users=\fP\f[CI]user1,user2,...\fP
A comma-separated list of users which are allowed access to the source chroot.
If empty or omitted, no users will be allowed access.  This will become the
\f[CI]users\fP option in the source chroot.
.TP
\f[CBI]source\-groups=\fP\f[CI]group1,group2,...\fP
A comma-separated list of groups which are allowed access to the source chroot.
If empty or omitted, no users will be allowed access.  This will become the
\f[CI]groups\fP option in the source chroot.
.TP
\f[CBI]source\-root\-users=\fP\f[CI]user1,user2,...\fP
A comma-separated list of users which are allowed \fBpassword-less\fP root
access to the source chroot.  If empty or omitted, no users will be allowed
root access without a password (but if a user is in \f[CI]users\fP, they may
gain access with a password).  This will become the \f[CI]root\-users\fP option
in the source chroot.  See the section \[lq]\fISecurity\fP\[rq] below.
.TP
\f[CBI]source\-root\-groups=\fP\f[CI]group1,group2,...\fP
A comma-separated list of groups which are allowed \fBpassword-less\fP root
access to the source chroot.  If empty or omitted, no users will be allowed
root access without a password (but if a user's group is in \f[CI]groups\fP,
they may gain access with a password).  This will become the
\f[CI]root\-groups\fP option in the source chroot.  See the section
\[lq]\fISecurity\fP\[rq] below.
.SS Mountable chroot options
The \[oq]block\-device\[cq], \[oq]loopback\[cq] and \[oq]lvm-snapshot\[cq]
chroot types implement device mounting.  These are chroots which require the
mounting of a device in order to access the chroot.  These chroots provide the
following additional options:
.TP
\f[CBI]mount\-options=\fP\f[CI]options\fP
Mount options for the block device.  These are additional options to pass to
.BR mount (8).
For example, \[lq]\-o atime,sync,user_xattr\[rq].
.TP
\f[CBI]location=\fP\f[CI]path\fP
This is the path to the chroot \fIinside\fP the filesystem on the device.  For
example, if the filesystem contains a chroot in \fI/chroot/sid\fP, you would
specify \[lq]/chroot/sid\[rq] here.  If the chroot is the only thing on the
filesystem, i.e. \fI/\fP is the root filesystem for the chroot, this option
should be left blank, or omitted entirely.
.SS Filesystem Union chroot options
The \[oq]block\-device\[cq], \[oq]directory\[cq] and \[oq]loopback\[cq] chroot
types allow for the creation of a session using filesystem unions to overlay
the original filesystem with a separate writable directory.  The original
filesystem is read-only, with any modifications made to the filesystem made in
the overlying writable directory, leaving the original filesystem unchanged.  A
union permits multiple sessions to access and make changes to a single chroot
simultaneously, while keeping the changes private to each session.  To enable
this feature, set \f[CI]union\-type\fP to any supported value.  If enabled, the
chroot will also be a \fBsource chroot\fP, which will provide additional
options (see \[lq]\fISource chroot options\fP\[rq], above).  All entries are
optional.
.TP
\f[CBI]union\-type=\fP\f[CI]type\fP
Set the union filesystem type.  Currently supported filesystems are
\[oq]aufs\[cq], \[oq]overlayfs\[cq] and \[oq]unionfs\[cq].  The default is
\[oq]none\[cq], which disables this feature.
.TP
\f[CBI]union\-mount\-options=\fP\f[CI]options\fP
Union filesystem mount options (branch configuration), used for mounting the
union filesystem specified with \fIunion\-type\fP.  This replaces the complete
\[lq]\-o\[rq] string for mount and allows for the creation of complex
filesystem unions.  Note that \[oq]aufs\[cq], \[oq]overlayfs\[cq] and
\[oq]unionfs\[cq] each have different supported mount options.
.B Note:
One can use the variables \[lq]${CHROOT_UNION_OVERLAY_DIRECTORY}\[rq] and
\[lq]${CHROOT_UNION_UNDERLAY_DIRECTORY}\[rq] to refer to the writable overlay
session directory and read-only underlying directory which are to form the
union.  See
.BR schroot\-setup (5)
for a complete variable list.
.TP
\f[CBI]union\-overlay\-directory\fP\f[CI]=directory\fP
Specify the directory where the writeable overlay session directories will be
created.  The default is \[oq]\*[SCHROOT_OVERLAY_DIR]\[cq].
.TP
\f[CBI]union\-underlay\-directory\fP\f[CI]=directory\fP
Specify the directory where the read-only underlying directories will be
created.  The default is \[oq]\*[SCHROOT_UNDERLAY_DIR]\[cq].
.SS Chroot isolation
.PP
On Linux systems, it is possible to isolate some resources when running a
command inside the chroot.  These include:
.TP
\[bu]
The network
.TP
\[bu]
System V semaphore undo lists
.TP
\[bu]
System V IPC messages, semaphores and shared memory
.TP
\[bu]
The UTS (uname) namespace
.PP
.TP
\f[CBI]unshare.net=\fP\f[CI]true\fP|\f[CI]false\fP
Unshare networking.  Network devices will not be shared with the host.  By
default, only the local loopback interface will be available.  A custom setup
script could make additional adjustments to the networking configuration.
.TP
\f[CBI]unshare.sysvipc=\fP\f[CI]true\fP|\f[CI]false\fP
Unshare System V IPC.  This creates a new IPC namespace (messages, semaphores
and shared memory are not shared with the host).
.TP
\f[CBI]unshare.sysvsem=\fP\f[CI]true\fP|\f[CI]false\fP
Unshare System V semaphore undo values.  This creates a separate undo list.
.TP
\f[CBI]unshare.uts=\fP\f[CI]true\fP|\f[CI]false\fP
Unshare the UTS namespace.  A different hostname and domainname may be
configured in the chroot, and will not be shared with the host.
.PP
Note that to specify this as overrides on the command-line, the key names
should be added to the \f[CI]user\-modifiable\-keys\fP or
\f[CI]rootr\-modifiable\-keys\fP keys keys.  See the section
\[lq]\fICustomisation\fP\[rq] below.
.SS Customisation
.PP
In addition to the configuration keys listed above, it is possible to add
custom keys.  These keys will be used to add additional environment
variables to the setup script environment when setup scripts are run.  The only
restriction is that the key name consists only of alphanumeric characters and
hyphens, begins with an alphabet character and contains at least one period.
That is to say, that it matches the extended regular expression
\[lq]^([a-z][a-z0-9]*\\.)+[a-z][a-z0-9-]*$\[rq].
.PP
For example:
.RS
.EX
debian.apt-update=true
debian.distribution=unstable
.EE
.RE
.PP
would set the following environment:
.RS
.EX
DEBIAN_APT_UPDATE=true
DEBIAN_DISTRIBUTION=unstable
.EE
.RE
.PP
Note that it is an error to use different key names which would set the same
environment variable by mixing periods and hyphens.
.PP
Custom configuration keys may also be modified at runtime using the
\fI\-\-option\fP option.  However, for security, only selected keys may be
modified.  These keys are specified using the following options:
.TP
\f[CBI]user\-modifiable\-keys=\fP\f[CI]key1,key2,..\fP
Set the keys which users may modify using \fI\-\-option\fP.
.TP
\f[CBI]root\-modifiable\-keys=\fP\f[CI]key1,key2,..\fP Set the keys which the
root user may modify using \fI\-\-option\fP.  Note that the root user may use
the keys specified in \f[CI]user\-modifiable\-keys\fP in addition to those
specified here.
.SS Localisation
.PP
Some keys may be localised in multiple languages.  This is achieved by adding
the locale name in square brackets after the key name.  For example:
.RS
.EX
description[en_GB]=\f[CI]British English translation\fP
.EE
.RE
.PP
This will localise the \f[CI]description\fP key for the en_GB locale.
.RS
.EX
description[fr]=\f[CI]French translation\fP
.EE
.RE
.PP
This will localise the \f[CI]description\fP key for all French locales.
.SH CHROOT NAMES
A number of characters or words are not permitted in a chroot name, session
name or configuration filename.  The name may not contain a leading period
(\[oq].\[cq]).  The characters \[oq]:\[cq] (colon), \[oq],\[cq] (comma) and
\[oq]/\[cq] (forward slash) are not permitted anywhere in the name.  The name
may also not contain a trailing tilde (\[oq]~\[cq]).  The rationale for these
restrictions is given below.
.TP
.RB \[oq] . \[cq]
A leading period could be used to create a name with a relative path in it, in
combination with \[oq]/\[cq], and this could allow overwriting of files on the
host filesystem.  Not allowing this character also means hidden files cannot be
created.  It also means some editor backups are automatically ignored.  Periods
are allowed anywhere else in the name.
.TP
.RB \[oq] : \[cq]
A colon is used as a namespace delimiter, and so is not permitted as part of a
chroot or session name.  LVM snapshot names may also not contain this character
due to a naming restriction by
.BR lvcreate (8).
.TP
.RB \[oq] / \[cq]
Names containing this character are not valid filenames.  A forward slash would
potentially allow creation of files in subdirectories.
.TP
.RB \[oq] , \[cq]
Commas are used to separate items in lists.  Aliases are separated by commas
and hence can't contain commas in their name.
.TP
.RB \[oq] ~ \[cq]
Filenames containing trailing tildes are used for editor backup files, which
are ignored.  Tildes are allowed anywhere else in the name.
.TP
.RB \[oq] dpkg-old \[cq]
.TQ
.RB \[oq] dpkg-dist \[cq]
.TQ
.RB \[oq] dpkg-new \[cq]
.TQ
.RB \[oq] dpkg-tmp \[cq]
These names may not appear at the end of a name.  These are saved copies of
conffiles used by the dpkg package manager, and will be ignored.
.SH SECURITY
.SS Untrusted users
Note that giving untrusted users root access to chroots is a \fBserious
security risk\fP!  Although the untrusted user will only have root access to
files inside the chroot, in practice there are many obvious ways of breaking
out of the chroot and of disrupting services on the host system.  As always,
this boils down to \fItrust\fP.
.PP
.B Do not give chroot root access to users you would not trust
.B with root access to the host system.
.SS Profiles
Depending upon which profile you have configured with the
\f[CI]script\-config\fP option, different filesystems will be mounted inside
the chroot, and different files will be copied into the chroot from the host.
Some profiles will mount the host's \fI/dev\fP, while others will not.  Some
profiles also bind mount additional parts of the host filesystem in order to
allow use of certain features, including user's home directories and specific
parts of \fI/var\fP.  Check the profile's \fIfstab\fP file to be certain of
what will be mounted, and the other profile files to see which files and system
databases will be copied into the chroot.  Choose a different profile or edit
the files to further restrict what is made available inside the chroot.
.PP
There is a tradeoff between security (keeping the chroot as minimal as
possible) and usability (which sometimes requires access to parts of the host
filesystem).  The different profiles make different tradeoffs, and it is
important that you assess which meets the security/usability tradeoff you
require.
.SH EXAMPLE
.EX
# Sample configuration

[sid]
type=plain
description=Debian unstable
description[fr_FR]=Debian instable
directory=/srv/chroot/sid
priority=3
users=jim
groups=sbuild
root\-users=rleigh
aliases=unstable,default

[etch]
type=block\-device
description=Debian testing (32\-bit)
priority=2
groups=users
#groups=sbuild\-security
aliases=testing
device=/dev/hda_vg/etch_chroot
mount\-options=\-o atime
personality=linux32

[sid\-file]
type=file
description=Debian sid file\-based chroot
priority=3
groups=sbuild
file=/srv/chroots/sid.tar.gz

[sid\-snapshot]
type=lvm\-snapshot
description=Debian unstable LVM snapshot
priority=3
groups=sbuild
users=rleigh
source\-root\-users=rleigh
source\-root\-groups=admin
device=/dev/hda_vg/sid_chroot
mount\-options=\-o atime,sync,user_xattr
lvm\-snapshot\-options=\-\-size 2G
.EE
.SH FILES
.SS Chroot definitions
.TP
\f[BI]\*[SCHROOT_CONF]\fP
The system-wide chroot definition file.  This file must be owned by the root
user, and not be writable by other.
.TP
\f[BI]\*[SCHROOT_CONF_CHROOT_D]\fP
Additional chroot definitions may be placed in files under this directory.
They are treated in exactly that same manner as \fI\*[SCHROOT_CONF]\fP.  Each
file may contain one or more chroot definitions.
.SS Setup script configuration
The directory \f[BI]\*[SCHROOT_SYSCONF_DIR]/default\fP contains the default
settings used by setup scripts.
.TP
\f[BI]config\fP
Main configuration file read by setup scripts.  The format of this file is
described in
.BR schroot\-script\-config (5).
This is the default value for the \f[CI]script\-config\fP key.  Note that this
was formerly named \fI\*[SCHROOT_SYSCONF_DIR]/script\-defaults\fP.  The following
files are referenced by default:
.TP
\f[BI]copyfiles\fP
A list of files to copy into the chroot from the host system.  Note that this
was formerly named \fI\*[SCHROOT_SYSCONF_DIR]/copyfiles\-defaults\fP.
.TP
\f[BI]fstab\fP
A file in the format decribed in
.BR fstab (5),
used to mount filesystems inside the chroot.  The mount location is relative to
the root of the chroot.  Note that this was formerly named
\fI\*[SCHROOT_SYSCONF_DIR]/mount\-defaults\fP.
.TP
\f[BI]nssdatabases\fP
System databases (as described in \fI/etc/nsswitch.conf\fP on GNU/Linux
systems) to copy into the chroot from the host.  Note that this was formerly
named \fI\*[SCHROOT_SYSCONF_DIR]/nssdatabases\-defaults\fP.
.so authors.man
.so copyright.man
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR sbuild (1),
.BR schroot (1),
.BR schroot\-script\-config (5),
.BR schroot\-faq (7),
.BR mount (8).
.\"#
.\"# The following sets edit modes for GNU EMACS
.\"# Local Variables:
.\"# mode:nroff
.\"# fill-column:79
.\"# End:
